% How the Nature of Political Preferences Shapes the Efficiency of Majority Rule Voting: Relaxing Assumptions about Voter Utilities % Peter DeScioli[^contact1] % Patrick Kraft[^contact2]

[^contact1]: Peter DeScioli is an Assistant Professor in political science at Stony Brook University (pdescioli@gmail.com).
[^contact2]: Patrick Kraft is a Ph.D. student in political science at Stony Brook University (patrick.kraft@stonybrook.edu).

\begin{abstract}

\end{abstract}

\doublespacing

# Introduction

Traditional models of issue voting assume that voters and candidates can
be placed on a single policy/ideology dimension and the voters’
utilities can be determined by the relative proximity of their ideal
points to the respective candidates [c.f. @downs1957economic]. In such a
framework, simple majority elections between two candidates are
generally expected to lead to desirable outcomes that maximize social
welfare. The goal of this paper is to examine how the underlying
assumption of voter utilities based on common policy dimensions affect
the expected welfare outcomes of majority voting.

A large body of research in political science and political sociology
showed how a multitude of factors can affect voter preferences
independent of pure issue positions and ideological dimensions. Such
factors include, but are not limited to, the candidates’ traits and
personalities, their perceived competence, and the nature of the
campaign [see for example @hayes2005candidate]. For example,
@todorov2005inferences showed that competence assessments solely based
on candidate pictures successfully predicted the results in U.S.
congressional elections [see also @mattes2010predicting]. Furthermore,
the effect of candidate appearance on electoral success is not limited
to the related inference about competence, but can be based on simple
assessments of the beauty of candidates [@berggren2010looks]. These
examples of non-issue based determinants of voter preferences indicate
the underlying utilities for candidates or parties might not be
reducible to a simple issue-based logic.

In the paper presented here, it will be argued, that focusing solely on
policy-based utilities induces strong assumptions about the
relationships between the utilities for competing candidates. Our goal
is to show how relaxing such assumptions can alter our conclusions about
the efficiency of voting rules. As a first step, we will focus on a
simple voting scenario of two competing candidates and varying sizes of
the electorate. We present simulation studies in order to examine the
efficiency of majority elections under different scenarios. Based on the
simulation results, we propose an experimental design in order to
provide further insights as to how the assumptions underlying the
ideal-point framework influence the expected social welfare outcomes of
voting rules.

Political Preferences and the Ideal Point Framework
===================================================

Spatial theories of elections and voter preferences have been very
prominent in political science. The since they have been introduced by
@downs1957economic

Formal models of voting behavior and political representation usually
assume that the voters’ utilities are

Majority Voting and Social Welfare
==================================

@hastie2005robust

Simulation Results
==================

Possible Experimental Approaches
================================

@oprea2007compensation

comparing auction mechanism to voting

uncertainty about issue positions

